---
toc: true
layout: post
description: Introduction post
categories: [markdown]
title: Welcome
---



I spent a weekend in the outskirts of Kampala, Uganda. I was there to attend a football(soccer) tournament organized by the high schools in the area. I was the captain of my team; therefore, I had a large role to play in planning our game strategy, determining who would  play in what position, and deciding  how many substitute players would take part in each game. 

It was a dreadful weekend, I played as a defensive midfielder, and one of my jobs was to cover as much ground on the football field while the other job was to be the conductor of our team formation. I had to have an acute spatial awareness of the field and the people on it at all times. The game for me was not just physical, it was also mental. 

The semi final game was challenging, we were losing 3 goals to 1. As the leader, I tried to keep the team’s morale up even while we were all running on fumes. And to make matters worse, out of nowhere the top scorer on our team got so frustrated that he demanded to be subbed out of the game. For a team already on fumes, this continued to drain our resolve to battle out the rest of the game.. I knew that as the only leader left on the field, my teammates would be looking to me for direction. Unfortunately, this was the moment I made a mistake. This one mistake stays with me even today, as it has taught me a lot about leadership. 

As the football game progressed, I was exhausted and saw no path to winning, I made a terrible decision to signal to my teammates that there was no need to put in any more effort into the match, I gave the team permission to act as they pleased and as a result, we lost the game. I was disappointed in myself for not applying effort till the last whistle. I was disappointed that I let my team give up and this decision to give up produced cascading effects. However, this mistake has taught me a major lesson about collective behavior and strategic thinking. 

My passion for researching and finding out more about the world around me first manifested in my passion for football (soccer in America). On a soccer field, there is a network structure and a lot of individual behaviors. Spending a lot of time on the soccer field growing up, I learned and observed that there are numerous settings in which a group of people simultaneously choose to act, knowing that the outcome will depend on the decisions made by all of them.

Exploring networks in technology and economic systems continues to be the intellectual center of my interests. The era of information technology has manifested  a new medium that almost all aspects of life are organized or self-organized. Understanding structures of different networks, behaviors and dynamics that arise from those networks is necessary for developing better mechanisms for civilized societies.

This post is an introduction to my view of the world. I am hoping to unify different areas that I constantly study such as maths, history, economics, and philosophy to understand the world I am living in. I want to expand my view of the world beyond path-dependency but also as compartments or nodes that shift from center to periphery in the network of humanity and the advent of civilization. I believe approaching different systems with an eye toward their patterns of internal structure and their feedback effects, can open society to solving different problems. This introductory post is my journey to highlight and learn about network structures and behaviors effects in my life.